# ‘array’ or ‘matrix’? Which should I use?
* Historically, NumPy has provided a special matrix type, np.matrix, which is a subclass of ndarray which makes binary operations linear algebra operations. You may see it used in some existing code instead of np.array. So, which one to use?

# Short answer

* Use arrays.

    * They are the standard vector/matrix/tensor type of numpy. Many numpy functions return arrays, not matrices.
    * There is a clear distinction between element-wise operations and linear algebra operations.
    * You can have standard vectors or row/column vectors if you like.
* Until Python 3.5 the only disadvantage of using the array type was that you had to use dot instead of * to multiply (reduce) two tensors (scalar product, matrix vector multiplication etc.). Since Python 3.5 you can use the matrix multiplication @ operator.

* Given the above, we intend to deprecate matrix eventually.

# Long answer

* NumPy contains both an array class and a matrix class. The array class is intended to be a general-purpose n-dimensional array for many kinds of numerical computing, while matrix is intended to facilitate linear algebra computations specifically. In practice there are only a handful of key differences between the two.

    * Operators * and @, functions dot(), and multiply():
        * For array, ``*`` means element-wise multiplication, while ``@`` means matrix multiplication; they have associated functions multiply() and dot(). (Before python 3.5, @ did not exist and one had to use dot() for matrix multiplication).
        * For matrix, ``*`` means matrix multiplication, and for element-wise multiplication one has to use the multiply() function.
    * Handling of vectors (one-dimensional arrays)
        * For array, the vector shapes 1xN, Nx1, and N are all different things. Operations like A[:,1] return a one-dimensional array of shape N, not a two-dimensional array of shape Nx1. Transpose on a one-dimensional array does nothing.
        * For matrix, one-dimensional arrays are always upconverted to 1xN or Nx1 matrices (row or column vectors). A[:,1] returns a two-dimensional matrix of shape Nx1.
    * Handling of higher-dimensional arrays (ndim > 2)
        * array objects can have number of dimensions > 2;
        * matrix objects always have exactly two dimensions.
    * Convenience attributes
        * array has a .T attribute, which returns the transpose of the data.
        * matrix also has .H, .I, and .A attributes, which return the conjugate transpose, inverse, and asarray() of the matrix, respectively.
    * Convenience constructor
        * The array constructor takes (nested) Python sequences as initializers. As in, array([[1,2,3],[4,5,6]]).
        * The matrix constructor additionally takes a convenient string initializer. As in matrix("[1 2 3; 4 5 6]").

# There are pros and cons to using both:

* array
    * :) Element-wise multiplication is easy: A*B.
    * :( You have to remember that matrix multiplication has its own operator, @.
    * :) You can treat one-dimensional arrays as either row or column vectors. A @ v treats v as a column vector, while v @ A treats v as a row vector. This can save you having to type a lot of transposes.
    * :) array is the “default” NumPy type, so it gets the most testing, and is the type most likely to be returned by 3rd party code that uses NumPy.
    * :) Is quite at home handling data of any number of dimensions.
    * :) Closer in semantics to tensor algebra, if you are familiar with that.
    * :) All operations (*, /, +, - etc.) are element-wise.
    * :( Sparse matrices from scipy.sparse do not interact as well with arrays.
* matrix
    * :\\ Behavior is more like that of MATLAB® matrices.
    * <:( Maximum of two-dimensional. To hold three-dimensional data you need array or perhaps a Python list of matrix.
    * <:( Minimum of two-dimensional. You cannot have vectors. They must be cast as single-column or single-row matrices.
    * <:( Since array is the default in NumPy, some functions may return an array even if you give them a matrix as an argument. This shouldn’t happen with NumPy functions (if it does it’s a bug), but 3rd party code based on NumPy may not honor type preservation like NumPy does.
    * :) A*B is matrix multiplication, so it looks just like you write it in linear algebra (For Python >= 3.5 plain arrays have the same convenience with the @ operator).
    * <:( Element-wise multiplication requires calling a function, multiply(A,B).
    * <:( The use of operator overloading is a bit illogical: * does not work element-wise but / does.
    * Interaction with scipy.sparse is a bit cleaner.

#### The array is thus much more advisable to use. Indeed, we intend to deprecate matrix eventually.
